DOC: add Python-level parallelism tips section (#30820)
numpy/numpy: doc/source/user/basics.performant_code.rst

.. _basics.performant_code:

***************************************************
Writing Performant NumPy Code with Multi-Core CPUs
***************************************************

Introduction
================

NumPy is designed for high performance numerical computing in Python by leveraging vectorized operations.

> However, vectorization does not always fully utilize the capabilities of multi-core processors. To realize multiprocessing and multithreading, additional strategies are necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, vectorization does not always fully utilize the capabilities of multi-core processors. To exploit parallelism, additional strategies are necessary.
```

General tips
++++++++++++

The following are general tips for utilizing multiprocessing.

Reduce creation overhead
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Process creation has a higher overhead compared to thread creation due to the need to initialize a new Python interpreter and memory space.
To mitigate this overhead, consider the following strategies:

* Use process pools to reuse existing processes instead of creating new ones for each task. `concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor` provides this feature.
* Select appropriate startup methods. On Unix-like systems, the ``fork`` method can be faster than ``spawn`` or ``forkserver`` because it duplicates the parent process's memory space. However, ``fork`` may cause potential issues when using combined with threads or certain libraries. See the `multiprocessing documentation <https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.html#contexts-and-start-methods>`__ for more details.

Reduce communication overhead
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Inter-process communication (IPC) can introduce significant overhead due to data serialization and transfer between processes. In Python, only picklable objects are allowed to be passed between processes.

> Due to this nature, multiprocessing is not suitable for the program which needs to synthesize data between processes frequently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to this limitation, multiprocessing is not suitable for programs which needs to serialize data between processes frequently.
```

To reduce communication overhead, consider the following strategies:

* Minimize the amount of data transferred between processes.
* Use shared memory constructs such as `multiprocessing.shared_memory`, `multiprocessing.Array` or `multiprocessing.Value` for large data that needs to be accessed by multiple processes.
* Set appropriate ``chunksize`` when using methods like ``map`` or ``imap`` in process pools. ``chunksize`` determines the number of tasks assigned to each process at a time, which can help balance the trade-off between task granularity and communication overhead.

> Balance processing load

Reviewer: This is also true for multithreading. Maybe move this out of the multiprocessing section?

Author: Thank you for the suggestion!
I created a new section `Common tips for both multiprocessing and multithreading` and moved this part there.

                for start in range(0, total_size, chunksize)
            ]
            _ = [future.result() for future in futures]

    if __name__ == '__main__':

        print("Python version is free-threaded:", not sys._is_gil_enabled())
        assert not sys._is_gil_enabled()

        xmin, xmax, ymin, ymax = -2.0, 1.0, -1.5, 1.5
        nx, ny = 800, 800
        max_iter = 10000
        n_workers = 10

        real = np.linspace(xmin, xmax, nx, dtype=np.float64)
        imag = np.linspace(ymin, ymax, ny, dtype=np.float64)

        SHARED_readonly_arr = (real[:, np.newaxis] + 1j * imag[np.newaxis, :]).ravel()
        SHARED_readonly_arr.flags.writeable = False

        SHARED_updating_steps = np.zeros(SHARED_readonly_arr.shape, dtype=np.int64)

        mandelbrot_set(SHARED_readonly_arr.size, max_iter, n_workers)
        mandelbrot_image = SHARED_updating_steps.reshape((nx, ny))

.. _basics.performant_code.third_party_libraries:

Third Party Libraries for Multi-Core Processing
===============================================

In many practical scenarios, third-party libraries can provide more convenient and efficient solutions than using Python's standard libraries.

> We will briefly introduce some third party libraries at the end of this introduction.

Reviewer: Can probably lose this sentence since the list starts immediately afterwards.

```suggestion
```

Multithreading
-----------------

Multithreading allows multiple threads to run within the same process, sharing the same memory space.
Starting with Python 3.13, a free-threading build of Python is available. When combined with libraries that are explicitly designed to be thread-safe, this can enable true parallel execution with threads.

As a high-level API, Python provides the `concurrent.futures.ThreadPoolExecutor` class  for thread-based parallelism.
Python also provides the `concurrent.futures.InterpreterPoolExecutor`, which uses multiple interpreters running in separate threads and avoids sharing Python objects between them. However, it is not yet available in NumPy. (See `gh-24755 <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/24755>`__ for details.)

The main pros and cons of multithreading are as follows:

Pros
++++
* Lower memory usage since threads share the same memory space
* Easier communication between threads

Cons
++++
* Possibility of race conditions when accessing shared data accidentally
* Limited performance improvement if using Python libraries are not thread-safe or have limited support for free-threaded Python builds

General tips
++++++++++++

> The following are general tips for utilizing multithreading.

Author: According to the CPython Issue ( https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/142518 ), the process of writing documentation about free threading seems almost finished. So, I've added the link below to the docs!
https://docs.python.org/3.15/library/threadsafety.html#thread-safety-guarantees

        total_size: int,
        max_iter: int,
        n_workers: int,
    ) -> None:

        chunksize = total_size // n_workers
        with ThreadPoolExecutor(max_workers=n_workers) as pool:
            futures = [
                pool.submit(
                    mandelbrot_block, start, min(start + chunksize, total_size), max_iter
                )
                for start in range(0, total_size, chunksize)
            ]
            _ = [future.result() for future in futures]

    if __name__ == '__main__':

        print("Python version is free-threaded:", not sys._is_gil_enabled())
        assert not sys._is_gil_enabled()

        xmin, xmax, ymin, ymax = -2.0, 1.0, -1.5, 1.5
        nx, ny = 800, 800
        max_iter = 10000
        n_workers = 10

        real = np.linspace(xmin, xmax, nx, dtype=np.float64)
        imag = np.linspace(ymin, ymax, ny, dtype=np.float64)

        SHARED_readonly_arr = (real[:, np.newaxis] + 1j * imag[np.newaxis, :]).ravel()
        SHARED_readonly_arr.flags.writeable = False

        SHARED_updating_steps = np.zeros(SHARED_readonly_arr.shape, dtype=np.int64)

        mandelbrot_set(SHARED_readonly_arr.size, max_iter, n_workers)

>         mandelbrot_image = SHARED_updating_steps.reshape((nx, ny))

Reviewer 2: I don't know if you're aware that I wrote a very similar example here: https://py-free-threading.github.io/examples/mandelbrot/

Author: I wasn’t aware of this example.
It seems to be more detailed than the example I included. 

I've added a link to this example in this section.
Would you prefer that I replace my example with this one as well?

Author: Thank you for the clarification.

I agree that pickling requirements are also the downsides of multiprocessing.
I think it would be worth mentioning `joblib` as a possible solution for handling pickling-related issues, so I've added a section `pickling considerations` in `General tips` of multiprocessing.

Calling use of `joblib` as general tips seems a little bit debatable, but I believe it is worth  to mention it. I am happy to revise this if necessary.

.. _basics.performant_code.other_tips:

Other Micro Tips for Writing Performant NumPy Code
==================================================

Use tuples for creating arrays
------------------------------

When creating NumPy arrays, using tuples instead of lists can lead to slight performance improvements.

.. code-block:: python

    # Using a list
    arr_list = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])

    # Using a tuple
    arr_tuple = np.array((1, 2, 3, 4, 5))

This is reported in https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/30514#issuecomment-3716554540

> Using tuples avoids critical sections in the array creation code path, resulting in faster execution. Critical sections are portions of code that must be executed by only one thread at a time to prevent data corruption. In NumPy, critical sections are managed using ``NPY_BEGIN_CRITICAL_SECTION_SEQUENCE_FAST`` and ``NPY_END_CRITICAL_SECTION_SEQUENCE_FAST``. You can refer to those macros if necessary for more details.

Reviewer 2: This whole section isn't true. Not your fault - my fault for not correcting that in the issue. 

It's not actually very easy to get data as tuples initially and building tuples is very slow. Converting to a tuple and then an array is slower than just converting a list to an array. 

We also fixed the scaling and performance issues that this is suggesting to work around. 

I'd just delete the whole subsection.

Avoids module attribute lookups
-------------------------------

Module attribute lookups can introduce overhead. To minimize this overhead, you can assign frequently used functions or attributes to local variables.
This is reported in https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/30494#issuecomment-3700169826

.. code-block:: python

    import numpy as np

    # Avoiding module attribute lookups
    sin = np.sin

    arr = array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])

>     value = sin(arr)

Author: I've deleted this section.

As a high-level API, Python provides the `concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor` class
to facilitate multiprocessing.

Firstly, we introduce brief Pros and Cons of multiprocessing:

Pros
++++
* Bypasses the Global Interpreter Lock (GIL), allowing true parallelism
* Avoids accidental data sharing due to separate memory spaces

Cons
++++
* Higher memory usage due to separate memory spaces for each process
* Difficulty in sharing data between processes, requiring serialization (pickling) of objects

General tips
++++++++++++

The following are general tips for utilizing multiprocessing.

Reduce creation overhead
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Process creation has a higher overhead compared to thread creation due to the need to initialize a new Python interpreter and memory space.
To mitigate this overhead, consider the following strategies:

* Use process pools to reuse existing processes instead of creating new ones for each task.
  `concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor` provides this feature.
* Select appropriate startup methods. On Unix-like systems, the ``fork`` method can be faster
  than ``spawn`` or ``forkserver`` because it duplicates the parent process's memory space.

>   However, ``fork`` may cause potential issues when using combined with threads or certain libraries. 

Reviewer 3: This is an understatement, I would say it's _fundamentally and irretrievably_ broken and should never be used. This is why Python changed the default away from `fork` in 3.14.

Reviewer: I don't think that's an accurate representation of `fork`. It definitely has use cases where it's the proper and better choice, and it's not broken. The fact that it's not easy to use correctly, and thus no longer a default, doesn't change that.

Reviewer 3: It's very often broken whenever you have threads. And many libraries start threads automatically on import, `numpy` amongst them in some configurations, often unbeknownst to users.

For example, if you're using an libgomp OpenMP-build of OpenBLAS you're going to get hangs on fork(): https://github.com/OpenMathLib/OpenBLAS/blob/1bd74ad3d1e8d21f86d1a6be35abfcdf27c0208a/driver/others/memory_qalloc.c#L295

From the libgomp bug description I suspect this is the case for libgomp OpenMP users in general.

Basically `fork()` is an invitation to mysterious "my software deadlocks twice a day and I have no idea why", and "someone else used my software in a slightly different environment and now it hangs twice a day and I have no idea why", and hanging is the best case failure. 

People who have the knowledge to look out for these things don't need to be told about `fork`. People who don't know to look (the audience for intro docs) should be told not to use `fork`.

Author: I've tweaked the wording about `fork` to make it more clear that it can lead to deadlocks or crashes and it is not recommended unless users know it well.

  See the `multiprocessing documentation <https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.html#contexts-and-start-methods>`__ for more details.

Reduce communication overhead
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Inter-process communication (IPC) can introduce significant overhead due to data serialization and transfer between processes. In Python, only picklable objects are allowed to be passed between processes.
Due to this limitation, multiprocessing is not suitable for programs which need to serialize data between processes frequently.

To reduce communication overhead, consider the following strategies:

* Minimize the amount of data transferred between processes.
* Use shared memory constructs such as `multiprocessing.shared_memory`, `multiprocessing.Array`
  or `multiprocessing.Value` for large data that needs to be accessed by multiple processes.

> * Set appropriate ``chunksize`` when using methods like ``map`` or ``imap`` in process pools.

Reviewer 4: As someone who is not familiar with multiprocessing/multithreaded development, I was a bit confused as to where this (the chunksize arg in particular) would come into play until I saw the Mandelbrot example below. Maybe mention here that you will show an example further ahead? If this is too basic and you expect the readers of this doc to already understand how to use this, feel free to ignore me.

Author: I agree. I've added a sentence at the beginning of `General tips` section to mention that there will be an example later in the document.

Pickling considerations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The worker function and its arguments must be picklable when using multiprocessing.
This requirement can become a limitation when working with complex data structures or dynamically
defined functions.

If you encounter pickling-related issues, consider the following strategies:

* Refactor your code to use simpler data structures or functions.
  For example, define worker functions at the top level of a module and avoid lambda or nested functions.
* Consider third-party libraries such as `joblib <https://github.com/joblib/joblib>`__.
  ``joblib``'s default backend ``loky`` relies on `cloudpickle <https://github.com/cloudpipe/cloudpickle>`__
  for serialization and can handle a wider range of Python objects than the standard ``pickle`` module.
  See the ``joblib`` documentaion on `Serialization of un-picklable objects <https://joblib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/auto_examples/serialization_and_wrappers.html>`__ for more details.

Multithreading
-----------------

Multithreading allows multiple threads to run within the same process, sharing the same memory space.

> Starting with Python 3.13, a free-threaded build of Python is available.

Reviewer 3: Maybe 3.14? Since that's first stable one.

Author: I wrote it as `Python 3.13` since I refered to the [PEP703](https://peps.python.org/pep-0703/).
But, as you suggested, according to the Python3.14 documentation below, stable support for free-threaded Python is added in Python 3.14, so I've tweaked the wording.

* https://docs.python.org/3/whatsnew/3.14.html#free-threaded-mode-improvements
* https://docs.python.org/3/whatsnew/3.14.html#free-threaded-python-is-officially-supported

When combined with libraries that are explicitly designed to be thread-safe,
this can enable true parallel execution with threads.
For details on free-threaded Python builds, see the
`Python Free-Threading Guide <https://py-free-threading.github.io/>`__.

As a high-level API, Python provides the `concurrent.futures.ThreadPoolExecutor` class 
for thread-based parallelism.

> Python also provides the `concurrent.futures.InterpreterPoolExecutor`,

Reviewer 4: This class does not get picked up by sphinx, maybe due to the CircleCI setup being [frozen on 3.12](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/blob/ea9cae77b41c531b8badbf5b7548e2029f6c13be/.circleci/config.yml#L12).

Author: Thank you for the information!
As a temporary workaround, I've set a link explicitly to the documentation of `concurrent.futures.InterpreterPoolExecutor` in the Python standard library documentation.

which uses multiple interpreters running in separate threads
and avoids sharing Python objects between them.
However, it is not yet available in NumPy.
(See `gh-24755 <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/24755>`__ for details.)

The main pros and cons of multithreading are as follows:

Pros
++++
* Lower memory usage since threads share the same memory space
* Easier communication between threads

Cons
++++

> * Possibility of race conditions when mutating shared data simultaneously with reads.

Reviewer 3: Maybe rephrase as "mutating shared data simultaneously with reads in other threads"

Author: Thanks. I've rephrased it.

* Limited performance improvement if using Python libraries are not thread-safe or have limited support for free-threaded Python builds

General tips
++++++++++++

The following are general tips for utilizing multithreading.
For more details on thread safety guarantees for built-in types
in Python's free-threaded build, see the Python documentation
on `Thread Safety Guarantees <https://docs.python.org/3.15/library/threadsafety.html#thread-safety-guarantees>`__.

> 

Reviewer 3: Might be worth saying something like:

> NumPy's linear algebra APIs (TODO exact reference, it's... `np.linalg` and `@` maybe?) may have their own thread pool, provided by the underlying BLAS library. If you have your own thread pool that is using all the cores on your machine, and you are using you will want to set the number of threads in BLAS to 1, which you can do with the `threadpoolctl` library (TODO with link). Otherwise you may end up using too many threads, slowing down your program.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion!
I've added a section about `Avoid CPU oversubscription` and metioned `threadpoolctl` there.

Avoid race conditions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Race conditions occur when multiple threads update shared data simultaneously,
leading to unpredictable results.
To avoid race conditions, consider the following strategies:

* Minimize the amount of shared data between threads by designing your program
  to use thread-local storage or by passing data explicitly to threads. 
* Prefer immutable NumPy arrays or read-only access patterns when possible,
  since they reduce the need for explicit synchronization.
* Use thread-safe data structures or synchronization primitives like locks, semaphores,
  or condition variables to manage access to shared data.
  Note that improper use of these synchronization mechanisms can cause deadlocks,
  so they should be used with care.

Common tips for both multiprocessing and multithreading
-------------------------------------------------------

> 

Reviewer 3: Set the pool size to `joblib.cpu_count()`.

Python's `cpu_count()` or the improved `process_cpu_count()` are OK, but they will give the wrong answer in containers (Docker, Kubernetes). `joblib.cpu_count()` does the right thing there (it's basically `loky.cpu_count()`, if you want to recommend that instead).

Author: I've added a new section about `Determine the correct number of cpus` and mentioned `joblib.cpu_count()` there.

        mandelbrot_image = mandelbrot_image.reshape((nx, ny))

Multithreading Example
----------------------

As in the multiprocessing example, we demonstrate how to use `concurrent.futures.ThreadPoolExecutor`
to parallelize the Mandelbrot set generation across multiple threads.
For more detailed explanations and additional examples,
see `Examples Demonstrating Free-Threaded Python <https://py-free-threading.github.io/examples/>`__.

Setup
+++++

Install a free-threaded build Python
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Before running the multithreading example, ensure you have a free-threaded build of Python 3.13 or later.
For example, if you use ``pyenv``, you can install it and create a virtual environment
naming ``numpy-multithreading`` as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

    pyenv install 3.14t-dev
    pyenv virtualenv 3.14t-dev numpy-multithreading
    pyenv activate numpy-multithreading

According to the `Python documentation <https://docs.python.org/3/howto/free-threading-python.html>`__, there are several ways to verify if your Python build is free-threaded. 

* Run ``python -VV`` in your terminal and check ``free-threading build`` is shown

> * Check the value of `sys._is_gil_enabled()` in a Python shell, which should return `False`.

Reviewer 2: Rather than giving people all this information (and these days I'd probably point to uv before pyenv), I'd just point people to the free-threaded guide's installation instructions, which tells people how to do this with whatever package manager they'd like to use.

Author: I've left the link to free-threaded guide's installation instructions only and deleted the part about `pyenv`.

Install NumPy from Source
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

NumPy includes ongoing work to improve compatibility and thread-safety
when used with free-threaded Python builds.
(See https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/30494 for details.)

Thus, to utilize multithreading parallelism fully, we may need to build NumPy from source.
Please refer to the :ref:`Building from source to use NumPy <building-from-source>` section

> for detailed instructions.

Reviewer 2: IMO we shouldn't include this in user-facing documentation, let's just delete this whole section.

Author: I agree! I've deleted it.

        max_iter = 10000
        n_workers = 10

        real = np.linspace(xmin, xmax, nx, dtype=np.float64)
        imag = np.linspace(ymin, ymax, ny, dtype=np.float64)

        SHARED_readonly_arr = (real[:, np.newaxis] + 1j * imag[np.newaxis, :]).ravel()
        SHARED_readonly_arr.flags.writeable = False

        SHARED_updating_steps = np.zeros(SHARED_readonly_arr.shape, dtype=np.int64)

        mandelbrot_set(SHARED_readonly_arr.size, max_iter, n_workers)
        mandelbrot_image = SHARED_updating_steps.reshape((nx, ny))

.. _basics.performant_code.third_party_libraries:

Third Party Libraries for Multi-Core Processing
===============================================

In many practical scenarios, third-party libraries can provide more convenient and efficient solutions
than using Python's standard libraries.

Dask
----

Dask is an open-source library that provides parallel compuing features
not only for a single machine but also for a cluster of machines.
It also provides ``DaskArray`` which has a similar API to NumPy's ``ndarray``. 
If you are familiar with NumPy, you can easily get started with ``DaskArray``.

* Dask Documentaion: https://docs.dask.org/en/stable/

> * Dask GitHub Repository: https://github.com/dask/dask

Reviewer 2: I'd add a section on joblib as well.

I would also probably link to `threadpoolctl`, which has hooks to prevent CPU oversubscription: https://github.com/joblib/threadpoolctl

Author: Thank you for the suggestion!
I've added sections about `joblib` and `threadpoolctl` with links to their documentation and GitHub repositories.
